Continuous KNN Join Processing for Real-time
Recommendation
Chong Yang†, Xiaohui Yu†‡, and Yang Liu†∗
†School of Computer Science and Technology
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China, 250101
‡School of Information Technology
York University, Toronto, ON, Canada, M3J 1P3
yangchong.sdu@163.com, xyu@sdu.edu.cn, yliu@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract—The explosive growth of user-generated contents
in social networking websites necessitates the recommendation
functionality that can push to the user the content that he/she
is most likely to be interested in. Such recommendation should
happen in real-time as new contents become available, because
“freshness” is an important consideration in people’s content-
consumption behavior. Representing users and contents as feature
vectors in a high-dimensional space, we can essentially cast
the problem of real-time recommendations as the problem of
computing the list of k nearest neighbors of each user, which
we call kNN join. Given the vast volume of contents and
users, the biggest challenge is how to continuously update the
kNN join results as new contents arrive. Existing methods for
incremental kNN join on data streams suffer from the “curse of
dimensionality” and high in-memory search cost. In this paper, we
present a solution that ﬁrst identiﬁes the users whose kNN’s might
be affected by the newly arrived content, and then update their
kNN’s respectively. We propose a new index structure named
HDR-tree in order to support the efﬁcient search of affected users.
HDR-tree performs dimensionality reduction through clustering
and principle component analysis (PCA) in order to improve
the search effectiveness. To further reduce response time, we
propose a variant of HDR-tree, called HDR*-tree, that supports
more efﬁcient but approximate solutions. The results of extensive
experiments show that our methods signiﬁcantly outperform
baseline methods.
Keywords—real-time recommendation, high-dimensional data,
k nearest neighbor join
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, social applications have become important
tools to help people connect and share interests. With the
rapid increase in the volume and velocity of user generated
contents, these applications often provide recommendation
functionalities to help users quickly identify interested contents
(e.g., tweets from Twitter, images from Flickr, videos from
YouTube). Traditionally, such recommendations are made in
an ofﬂine batch fashion. However, new contents arrive at a very
fast pace in a streaming fashion in these social applications.
For example, on average about 2,000 images are uploaded on
Flickr in a minute. It is essential to recommend to the users
new contents that are of interest while the contents are still
fresh, as there is a clear tendency for users of such applications
to prefer newer contents. This calls for a push-based real-time
∗Corresponding author.
recommendation paradigm, which has two features: (1) real-
time, meaning that the list of recommended contents (which
we refer to as items in the sequel) for a user is computed
and updated in real-time as data evolve; and (2) push-based,
meaning that long-running requests can be registered and new
contents of interest continuously pushed to the users.
In this paper, we are concerned with supporting push-
based real-time content-based ﬁltering, which recommends
items based on their contents and the user’s proﬁle. The choice
of content-based ﬁltering over collaborative ﬁltering (CF) is
mainly due to the fact that the “cold start” problem for CF
(i.e., not having enough rating data for new items) is especially
serious in the context of social applications as new items are
becoming available all the time.
If we represent items and users by feature vectors in the
same space (which can be obtained in a variety of ways),
a sensible and robust approach to supporting content-based
ﬁltering is to recommend to the user the items that are his/her
k nearest neighbors (kNN), for a given a distance metric. As
there are many users to be served at the same time, we can
cast the problem of computing the recommendation lists for all
the users as a kNN join problem, which is deﬁned as ﬁnding
the kNN results for a set of queries on a given dataset. As
the representation of items in social applications often require
a large number of features, the data in our problem are of
high dimensionalities. Thus, the main issue we tackle is to
efﬁciently process high-dimensional kNN joins of the item set
and the user set in a continuous manner.
Most existing kNN join algorithms do not work well for
our problem. Some methods [1][2] process kNN joins on static
datasets, and may incur a high cost if applied directly to
streaming data due to the re-computation of the kNN join
results upon every update. There do exist works that address
the kNN join problem for data streams [3][4], but only for
the case where the dimensionality of the dataset is low. The
efﬁciency of these methods deterioriates as the dimensionality
of datasets increases due to the curse of dimensionality [5]. To
solve this problem, Yu et al. [6] consider making incremental
updates to high-dimensional kNN join results, in a disk-
resident setting. They propose a kNNJoin+ algorithm based
on an index called the Sphere-tree to deal with the update.
However, the R-tree-like structure adopted in the Sphere-tree
has mediocre pruning capabilities in high-dimensional spaces.
Also, distance computation in high-dimensional spaces incurs
non-trivial cost. Moreover, it is very difﬁcult for disk-based
2014 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
1550-4786/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICDM.2014.20
640


solutions to meet the real-time requirement in our problem
due to the high I/O cost involved.
We propose a main-memory-based solution to the problem
of continuous kNN join. The basic idea of our approach is to
ﬁrst identify the users whose kNN results can be inﬂuenced by
the updated items, followed by recomputing the kNN results
for this (usually small) subset of users. We introduce a new
index structure called the High-dimensional R-tree (HDR-tree)
to efﬁciently search for affected users by the updated items.
HDR-tree is built on the user set and contains information of
the kNN join results. We use clustering and principle compo-
nent analysis (PCA) techniques for dimensionality reduction
to lower the search cost and at the same time guarantee the
accuracy of results.
Since in many cases, it is acceptable that new items are
recommended to most of the interested users instead of exactly
all, we further consider providing fast approximate solutions.
The small reduction in precision is often a sacriﬁce we could
make in return for faster response. To this end, we propose a
variant of the HDR-tree named HDR*-tree to support the fast
approximate retrieval of affected users. The main difference
between the HDR*-tree and the HDR-tree is that the former
utilizes random projection [7] for dimensionality reduction
instead of PCA for the latter. HDR*-tree is demonstrated to be
more efﬁcient than HDR-tree with a reasonable accuracy lower
bound. We can also control the trade-off between efﬁciency
and accuracy easily.
In summary, we make the following contributions.
1)
We propose the problem of real-time content-based
recommendation on social data. We model it as
a continuous high-dimensional kNN join problem,
and present a new index structure named HDR-tree
to efﬁciently update the kNN join results as new
contents become available.
2)
We propose another index structure named HDR*-
tree to support fast approximate solutions to the kNN
join problem. We analyze the cost and accuracy of
using our index structures for real-time recommen-
dation.
3)
We conduct experiments on both real and synthetic
datasets and compare our proposals with the baseline
methods to demonstrate their efﬁciency.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion II we present the related work. Section III describes some
preliminaries. Section IV describes our index structure HDR-
tree to search for affected users, and Section V presents the
algorithm to update recommendation lists. Section VI describes
the index structure HDR*-tree to support fast approximate
solutions. Section VII presents the experiment results, and
Section VIII concludes this paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
There are two main approaches to recommender systems
in literature: content-based ﬁltering and collaborative ﬁltering.
Content-based ﬁltering [8] approaches use a discrete number of
features of items to recommend additional items with similar
properties. Collaborative ﬁltering [9], on the other hand, builds
a model of user behaviours and recommends items in other
users’ preference lists to a user with similar interests.
As social network websites become popular, real-time
recommendation attracts much attention. For example, Google
New [10] constructs large scale and dynamic recommender
systems based on ofﬂine models. Online update problems are
addressed by Agarwal et al. [11] using the Fast Online Bilinear
Factor Model (FOBFM). Rendle et al. [12] investigate online
matrix factorization learning methods for rating prediction.
Diaz-Aviles et al. [13] address the problem of real-time top-N
recommendation in social streams using a learning to rank
approach. However, the above works are mainly based on
collaborative ﬁltering and machine learning methods. Due to
the “cold start” problem of collaborative ﬁltering, new items
can not be recommended before they are rated by enough users.
Recently, Abbar et al. [14] work on recommending the most
diverse articles to users in real-time. Parallel to their works
which ofﬂine construct the model, we provide efﬁcient real-
time recommendations to users by proposing a continuous k
nearest neighbors join method in this study.
The kNN methods are frequently used in recommendation
systems. As items are often represented by more than one
hundred of features, data in content-based recommendation are
of high dimensions. Indexing structures designed to cope with
high-dimensional kNN query have been studied extensively. To
reduce the effect of the curse of dimensionality [5] many tech-
niques are proposed such as data approximation (e.g., VA-File
[5]), one-dimensional transformation (e.g., iDistance [15]), and
dimensionality reduction (e.g., Δ-tree [16]). For approximate
similarity queries, locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) [17] is an
efﬁcient method which can be considered as performing prob-
abilistic dimensionality reduction. B¨ohm et al. [2] ﬁrst propose
the kNN join problem which ﬁnds the k nearest neighbors for
a set of queries in a single-run operation. MuX [2], Gorder
[18] and iJoin [1] are kNN join algorithms proposed for high-
dimensional datasets which mainly use nested loop techniques.
However, these index structures are mostly designed for static
datasets. To continuously process kNN joins for users on the
item stream, we have to always recompute the kNN results for
all the users, which can be very expensive.
The problems of kNN and kNN join processing on da-
ta streams are mostly studied in a low-dimensional setting.
Koudas et. al. [19] present the Disc technique to efﬁciently
report the approximate answers to kNN queries. Bohm et al.
[4] aim at efﬁcient processing of exact kNN queries. They use
a grid structure to index queries and use skyline techniques to
monitor query results. Wee and Stephane [3] introduce the
framework of progressive and approximate join algorithms
on data streams. Their methods do not work well in high-
dimensional datasets as the increase of dimensionality. Yu et
al. [6] consider the incremental update of high-dimensional
kNN joins in a disk-resident situation. They mainly focus on
decreasing I/O cost, and the kNNJoin+ algorithm suffers from
the problem of high-overlapping of nodes and the non-trivial
cost of computing distances in high-dimensional space.
Our work is also related to the reverse kNN (RkNN)
query problem, which retrieves all the objects that have the
query as one of their k nearest neighbors. Korn et al. [20]
propose an algorithm based on an index called Rnn-tree which
precomputes for each data point its nearest neighbor. Yang et
641


al. [21] improve the Rnn-tree to make it efﬁcient for both
NN query and RNN queries. Stanoi et al. [22] eliminate the
need for precomputing all NNs by utilizing some properties
of RNN retrieval and pruning directly on a data partitioning
index. Tao et al. [23] propose a TPL pruning algorithm to
deal with multidimensional RkNN query. Again, all these
structures do not work well on datasets with high dimensions.
High-dimensional RNN and RkNN query are studied mostly
for disk-resident situations [24][25]. However, they consider
different situations to ours and their structures do not work
well on main-memory datasets in our problem.
III.
PRELIMINARIES
A. Content-based ﬁltering
We use the popular approach of content-based ﬁltering to
make recommendations. Suppose we have a user set U =
{u1, · · · , uN} and an item set I = {i1, · · · , iM}. In content-
based ﬁltering, it is common to represent items and users by
d-dimensional vectors with each dimension corresponding to a
feature, and the k nearest neighbor (kNN) items for each user
are recommended. In this paper, we adopt the frequently used
Euclidean distance to measure the similarity between users and
items [8], but the solutions can be generalized to other distance
metrics as well.
As we need to ﬁnd the kNN results in I for every user in U,
we can perform kNN join processing to solve the problem. As
shown in Deﬁnition 1, kNN join aims to ﬁnd the kNN results
for a set of queries on a dataset in a single-run operation [2].
There have been many existing algorithms for efﬁcient kNN
join processing in literature.
Deﬁnition 1 (KNN Join): In the d-dimensional space, giv-
en a query point set Q = {q1, q2, · · · , qn} and an object point
set O = {o1, o2, · · · , om}, the kNN join returns the k nearest
neighbors on O for each query in Q.
B. Real-time recommendation on social streams
A recommendation list Rj is maintained for every user
uj that contains the the items that are kNN’s of the user.
As most users only care about the recent items in social
network applications, we do not need to recommend an item
any more if a considerable amount of time has passed by. We
thus give every item a lifetime; the item can be a candidate
for recommendation only during that time period. We use
a sliding window W to monitor the item streams and only
the items within the window can be recommended. While
new items appear or old items expire, we need to update the
recommendation lists for the users in U accordingly.
For example, in Fig. 1, every line corresponds to an item.
The start of the line represents the time when the item appears
in the sliding window W and the end of a line represents the
time when the item expires in W. The vertical axis represents
the distance between an item and uj. Assuming that we
recommend the 2NN items to every user, we will recommend
{i1, i4} to uj at time 0 because they are nearest to uj. At time
t1, item i2 appears in W, which is nearer to uj than i1 and
i4, so we need to update Rj to {i2, i4}. At time t2, item i2
is removed from W for exceeding its lifetime, so we delete it
from Rj and push new recommendation results {i1, i4} to uj.
Time
Distance  to 
0
1t
2t
3t
4t
1i
2i
3i
4i
5i
1
dist
2
dist
3
dist
4
dist
5
dist
ju
Fig. 1.
Example of real-time recommendation
Ă
Ă
W
Delete
Insert
Update
Update






Recommendation lists
(
,
)
j
j
u
R
1i
2i
Mi
'i
Fig. 2.
Update of the join results for a sliding window
At time t3 and t4, as the appearance of i5 and the expiration
of i3 do not affect the recommendation list of uj, we do not
need to update Rj.
C. KNN join with incremental update
The main challenge is to continuously process kNN join
on a sliding window of items as shown in Fig. 2. To efﬁciently
update the join results, we use a two-phase method: the
retrieval phase to ﬁnd the affected users by the updated item,
and the recommendation phase to update the recommendation
lists. The retrieval task is actually a reverse k nearest neighbors
problem [26] as presented in Deﬁnition 2.
Deﬁnition 2 (Reverse KNN): In the d dimensional space,
given a query point set Q = {q1, q2, · · · , qn} and an object
point set O = {o1, o2, · · · , om}, reverse kNN (RkNN) query
for qj in Q is to ﬁnd all the points that contain qj as one of
their k nearest neighbors.
An updated item i′’s affected user set is equivalent to i′’s
RkNN results set on U. Directly searching for RkNN results
in high-dimensional space is often expensive. However, if we
have the kNN items for every user in U already, then we have
the following observations. For any new item, if it falls into
the boundary sphere of uj that centers at uj with a radius
equal to the distance between uj and its current k-th NN, it
will become one of the kNN’s of uj. Similarly, for any expired
item, if it is within the boundary sphere of uj, it must have
been in the kNN list of uj. So we have the following lemma,
which has been exploited in previous work [6].
Lemma 1: A new (expired) item i′ will affect the recom-
mendation list of a user uj in U, if and only if i′ is in the
sphere centered at uj with radius dknnj, where dknnj is the
642


TABLE I.
SUMMARY OF NOTATIONS
I, U
item set and user set
i, u
item and user
W
the sliding window
k
the number of nearest neighbors
d, r
the dimensionality of datasets
R, R′
the kNN and RkNN result sets
f
the fanout of the tree
l
a level of the tree
L
the height of the tree
C
clusters
p, q, o, p′, q′
points
P, Q, O
point sets
n, m, N, M
the size of a set
X, V
matrix
α, β, θ, η, ε
associated parameters of the tree
dist
distance
distpca
distance after PCA transformation
distrp
distance after random projection
dknn
distance to the kth nearest neighbor
maximum distance between uj and its k nearest neighbors
before i′’s appearance (expiration).
According to the lemma, we mean to build an index on U
using the dknn value, which can be then used to search for
the affected users by each updated (i.e., new or expired) item.
After we get the set of affected users of an updated item i
′,
only the recommendation list for each user uj in the set has to
be updated in the recommendation phase. If i′ is a new item,
we add i′ into Rj and rank Rj to keep the kNN results. If i′ is
an expired item, we delete i′ from Rj. Because the expiration
of an item will cause Rj to contain less than k results, we
have to recompute Rj when this happens.
Some notations used in this paper are given in Table I.
IV.
HDR-TREE
As discussed in the previous section, the ﬁrst phase is
to identify the affected users by the updated items, which
is actually an RkNN query problem on U for each updated
item i′. As the data are of high dimensionality, we use
the principle component analysis (PCA) technique to reduce
computational cost, and we propose a new main-memory index
structure called High-dimensional R-tree (HDR-tree). We build
the index on U and search for the affected user set based on
Lemma 1.
A. Principle component analysis
PCA [27] is an important dimensionality reduction tech-
nique. When points are transformed into lower dimensional
space, the computational cost can be greatly reduced. The
process of computing PCA is as follows. Let X[d×N] be a point
matrix, where d is the dimensionality and N is the number of
points. We ﬁrst compute its covariance matrix Y , and then
compute the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of Y . After that, we
rank the eigenvalues and choose the eigenvectors correspond-
ing to the r largest eigenvalues to form a transformation matrix
V[r×d]. Finally, we transform a point p to the r-dimensional
space by multiplying it with V .
PCA has the following good properties [16]. Let p1, p2
be the d-dimensional points that are reduced to a r(r < d)
dimensional space by PCA. Let the points after dimensionality
reduction be p′
1, p′
2. Then, if dist(p′
1, p′
2) > c (c is a constant),
we have dist(p1, p2) > c. Because only some dimensions
are preserved, the distance between two points in the lower
dimensional space can be less than the actual distance in the
original space. When a new point is added in, we can simply
transform it to the lower PCA space by multiplying it with the
precomputed V .
B. Index structure
The structure of HDR-tree is similar to that of the R-
tree which is formed by hierarchically partitioning the dataset.
One of the differences is that we are dealing with the lower
dimensional data in the non-leaf node. We reduce data in
the user set U into several lower dimensional spaces using
PCA. Each level of the tree represents the data space with
different dimensions such that the root level has the least
number of dimensions and the leaf level contains the data of
full dimensions. The dimensionality at each level of the tree
monotonically increases from the root to the leaf nodes. The
structure of HDR-tree is shown in Fig. 3.
The partitioning is done through clustering. At the root lev-
el, users in U are transformed to the d1-dimensional space by
PCA and is partitioned into f clusters C1
1, C1
2, · · · , C1
f. At the
second level, each C1
i is further partitioned into sub-clusters
C2
i1, C2
i2, · · · , C2
if in the d2-dimensional space. The process is
repeated at each level l, where clusters are partitioned in the
dl-dimensional space. The users in their full dimensionality
are stored in the leaf nodes.
Each cluster in the non-leaf node is represented by a tuple
(center, radius, number, maxdknn, l, ptr), where center is
the center of the cluster in the dl-dimensional space, radius
is the radius of the cluster, number is the number of users
in the cluster, and maxdknn refers to the maximum distance
between the users in the cluster and their k nearest neighbor
items. ptr is the pointer to the node at the next level. In the
leaf node, the actual user set Uj in the cluster is stored with
no dimensionality reduction.
C. Construction
The construction of HDR-tree follows a top-down ap-
proach. We ﬁx the fanout of the tree and partition the user set
using clustering techniques at different dimensions. Here we
choose the commonly used k-means algorithm as the clustering
method, but other methods can also be used. If the number of
users in a node is below a threshold θ, we make it a leaf node;
otherwise, we make it a non-leaf node and push it into an FIFO
queue for further partitioning. The procedure stops when the
queue is empty.
Notice that HDR-tree is not a height-balanced tree. But it
is more efﬁcient because real world datasets are often skewed.
Sparse clusters are not further partitioned which can help to
reduce the number of nodes, and dense clusters are partitioned
to become more ﬁne-grained to improve the effectiveness of
pruning during search. The height of the tree can be estimated
as L = ⌈logfN⌉, where f is the fanout. θ is set to a value
that avoids making the actual level of tree exceed L too much.
When the level of a cluster in the construction procedure is
greater than L and the size is larger than θ, we continue to
partition the cluster using the full dimensional user set, which
means dl = d (if l > L).
643


1
1C
1
2C
2
11
C
2
12
C
2
21
C
2
22
C
3
121
C
3
122
C
3
211
C
3
212
C
3
221
C
3
222
C
l=1
l=2
l=3
Non-leaf
node
Root
Leaf
node
21
2
[d ]
center
21
2
[d ]
radius
21
number
21
maxdknn
2
l =
21
ptr
22
2
[d ]
center
22
number
22
maxdknn
2
l =
22
ptr
22
2
[d ]
radius
Level of the node
Center of the cluster in      dimensions
Number of users in the cluster   
The maxdknn value of  the cluster
Pointer to the child node
ld
Radius of the cluster in     dimensions
ld
11
U
121
U
122
U
211
U
212
U
221
U
222
U
2
21
C
2
22
C
Fig. 3.
An example of HDR-tree with f = 2. Cl
ij is the sub-clusters formed on the user set of Ci with dl dimensions and d1 < d2 < d3. The structure of a
non-leaf node is shown to the right of the tree. The leaf nodes store the actual users with their dknn value.
Algorithm 1 Construction Algorithm
Input: U,f,θ
Output: HDR-tree
1: C1=new Clusters(U,f,d1);
2: for each C1
j ∈C1 do
3:
maxdknn1
j=Max(C1
j .dknn);
4: end for
5: initial root= new NonLeafNode(C1, maxdknn1, 1)
6: FIFO queue queue=null;
7: push root in queue;
8: while queue!=null do
9:
node node = queue.get();
10:
C′ = node.clusters;
11:
for each clusters C′
j ∈C′ do
12:
if C′
j.size() < θ then
13:
LN=new LeafNode(C′
j);
14:
n.children[j] = LN
15:
else
16:
level = node.l + 1
17:
C′′=new Clusters(C′
j,f,dlevel);
18:
for each C′′
j ∈C′′ do
19:
maxdknn′′
j =Max(C′′
j .dknn);
20:
end for
21:
NLN=new NonLeafNode(C′′, maxdknn′′, level);
22:
n.children[j] = NLN
23:
push NLN in queue;
24:
end if
25:
end for
26: end while
As in our problem we assume that the user set does
not change, we can store the transformation matrix and use
them to map new items from the original space to the cor-
responding lower dimensional spaces. We use the eigenvalues
{γ1, γ2, · · · , γd}, which are produced in the PCA algorithm
and are in a decreasing order, to decide the dimensionality of
each level. We ﬁrst choose a value d1 as the dimensionality
of the ﬁrst level. Then the dimensionality dl of each level is
chosen as the smallest value that satisﬁes:
dl

i=1
γi ≥l −1
L −1(
d

i=1
γi −
d1

i=1
γi) +
d1

i=1
γi
(1 < l ≤L)
'
pca
i
pca
j
C
j
C
'(i ,C )
pca
j
dist
'i
ju
'(i ,C )
j
dist
'(i ,u )
j
dist
j
dknn
Fig. 4.
Prune a node in a lower dimensional space
D. Search algorithm
We search for the affected users on HDR-tree according to
Theorem 1, by which we can prune branches of the HDR-
tree during the search procedure. For example, in Fig. 4,
Cpca
j
refers to a cluster of node which is partitioned in the
lower dimensional space. The cluster in the original space
is represented by Cj. We transform an updated item i′ into
the same lower dimensional space to Cpca
j
using the stored
eigenmatrix. According to the property of PCA, for any user
point uj in the cluster we have
distpca(i′, Cj) < dist(i′, Cj) ≤dist(i′, uj)
So if we have distpca(i′, Cj) ≥maxdknn, we can get dist(i′,
uj) > maxdknn > dknnj, meaning that all users in the
cluster will not be affected by i′ and its child nodes do not
have to be scrutinized further according to Lemma 1.
Theorem 1: Suppose the distance between an item i′ and
a cluster Cl
j of the non-leaf node node in the HDR-tree in the
dl-dimensional space is greater than the maxdknn value of
Cl
j. Then we can make the following assertions: (1) If i′ is a
new item, no users in the cluster will contain i′ as one of its
k nearest neighbors after i′ is inserted. (2) If i′ is an expired
item, no users in the cluster have contained i′ as one of their
k nearest neighbors.
We make a depth-ﬁrst search on the HDR-tree. The pseu-
docode of searching for affected users of an item is shown
in Algorithm 2. The starting node is initialized as the root
of the tree. Lines 1 to 6 deal with the leaf nodes by direct
computation and comparison. In Lines 8 to 14, we prune
those non-leaf nodes which satisfy the conditions set out in
Theorem 1 and send the rest of the nodes to the next round of
search. The whole procedure can prune all users that cannot be
644


Algorithm 2 HDRSearch
Input: node node, updated item i′
Output: affected user set R′
1: if node is a leaf node then
2:
for each users uj in node do
3:
if dist(i′, uj) ≤uj.dknn then
4:
add uj in R′.
5:
end if
6:
end for
7: else
8:
C′ = node.clusters
9:
for each clusters C′
j ∈C′ do
10:
if distnode.dimension(i′, C′
j) < C′
j.maxdknn then
11:
HDRSearch(node.children[j],i′);
12:
end if
13:
end for
14: end if
15: return R′
affected by the updated item. Although the information loss in
dimensionality reduction causes more nodes to be visited than
that in the original space, the computational cost of searching
for inﬂuenced users on HDR-tree is greatly reduced because
of the good properties of PCA.
V.
UPDATING RECOMMENDATION LISTS
Once the affected users are identiﬁed, we can update the
kNN list of those users. In this section, we present the algo-
rithm for updating the list and analyze the cost of computation.
A. Update algorithm
After the retrieval part of ﬁnding the affected user set R′,
we only need to update the recommendation lists of users in
R′. We can see the procedure of update in Algorithm 3. The
HDR-tree also needs to be updated because the maxdknn of
the clusters containing the users in R′ must be recomputed.
AdjustMaxdknn is the method to adjust the maxdknn
of corresponding clusters. It can be completed by utilizing
a recursive scan on HDR-tree to ﬁnd the nodes containing
affected users in R′ and to adjust the maxdknn value of all
the clusters in the searching path. Notice that the expiration
of an item will cause the number of the user’s kNN results
to become less than k. We have to recompute its kNN results
as the new recommendation list by computing the distances
between the user to all items in the sliding window.
B. Cost analysis
As we consider all data in main memory, the dominant cost
is the computational cost instead of I/O cost as in previous
disk-based solutions. Updating recommendation lists mainly
consists of three parts of cost.
The ﬁrst is costRKNN, the cost of searching for affected
users on HDR-tree. In Algorithm 2, we use α to refer to the
average probability to search the sub-tree of a node. The fanout
of tree is f. The height of the HDR-tree can be estimated
as L = ⌈logfN⌉. Then the total number of computed non-
leaf nodes can be estimated as ((fα)L−1 −1)/(fα −1).
Algorithm 3 Update Algorithm
Input: updated item i′
Output: updated R
1: R′=HDRSearch(root,i′) on HDR-tree;
2: for each uj in R′ do
3:
update the recommendation list of uj;
4:
if Rj.size() < k then
5:
compute the kNN results for uj as the new Rj;
6:
end if
7:
update dknnj;
8: end for
9: AdjustMaxdknn on HDR-tree;
The cost of the computation to non-leaf nodes is ((fα)L−1 −
1)dlevel/(fα −1), where dlevel is the average dimensionality
of each level. The cost of distance computation in leaf nodes
is (fα)Ld where d is the original dimensionality. So we can
get the theorem below.
Theorem 2: The cost of searching for affected users using
the HDR-tree can be estimated as
costRKNN = ((fα)L−1 −1)dlevel/(fα −1) + (fα)Ld
The second part is the cost of update operation on the kNN
join results, costKNN. It differs on whether the updated item
is a new or an expired item. We assume that the size of the
sliding window is approximately ﬁxed, meaning the average
number of appearance equals to the number of expiration in
a long-run processing. The average number of affected users
for one update can be estimated as |U|k/|W|, where |W| is
the size of the sliding window. If the update item is a new
item, we need to insert the item into the users’ kNN lists.
The cost is O(|U|k2/|W|). If the update item is an expired
item, we need to recompute the kNN results for the affected
users. The cost is O(|W| ∗d ∗|U|k/|W|) = O(|U|dk). At
last, we can estimate the cost of update kNN join results as
costKNN = 0.5 ∗O(|U|k2/|W|) + 0.5 ∗O(|U|dk).
The last part is the maintainence cost of HDR-tree,
costMA, which can be done in one traverse of the tree for all
the affected users. so we can estimate costMA = O(dlevel ∗
L ∗f ∗|U|k/|W|).
VI.
HDR*-TREE FOR APPROXIMATE PROCESSING
From the cost analysis we can see that how well the
distance is preserved in lower dimensional spaces affects the
efﬁciency of search on HDR-tree. Although PCA technique
preserves the most important components of the points, it is
not necessarily the best method to preserve the distances in
lower dimensional spaces. In addition, it often sufﬁces to return
approximate answers to the kNN joins in the sense that it is
acceptable for some users to be missing from the affected user
list by a new item with a small probability, in return for faster
processing.
We thus propose a new index structure named HDR*-
tree to approximately search for affected users. We improve
HDR-tree by using another dimensionality reduction method
called random projection [7], which uses a random projection
matrix to project data to a lower dimensional subspace. The
645


main beneﬁt of random projection is that it can approximately
preserve the distance between points in lower dimensional
space [28]. The clustering effect on lower dimensional space
of random projection is also better than that of using PCA
[29]. Furthermore, the transformation matrix of random pro-
jection can be acquired much easier than PCA without great
computation cost.
A. Random projection
In random projection, the original d dimensional data can
be projected into a r (r << d) dimensional subspace through
a r × d random matrix V whose columns have unit lengths.
The matrix notation of a matrix X[d×n] projected to a lower
dimensional subspace is
X′
[r×n] = V[r×d]X[d×n]
where n is the total number of points. The main idea of random
projection comes from the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma [7].
There are many choices for the random matrix, and one of
the most frequently-used transformation matrix is suggested by
Achlioptas [7]. The elements of the random matrix are drawn
from the following distribution:
vi,j =
⎧
⎨
⎩
+
√
3
with probability of 1/6
0
with probability of 2/3
−
√
3
with probability of 1/6
Let V be a r × d random matrix generated from the above
distribution. Suppose that X is a d×n matrix of n points. For
given constants ε, β > 0, we choose an integer g such that g
satisﬁes
g ≥g0 ≈
4 + 2β
ε2/2 −ε3/3 log n.
Then
we
can
get
the
projected
matrix
X′
[r×n]
=
1
√gV[r×d]X[d×n]. We have the following results regarding the
distances between projected points.
Theorem 3: For any points p, q in the matrix X[d×n], we
have
(1 −ε)dist(p, q) ≤dist(p′, q′) ≤(1 + ε)dist(p, q)
with probability of at least η = 1 −n−β, where p′ and q′ are
the projected points of p and q in X′
[r×n] respectively.
We call ε the distortion value, and we use ε and η as the
parameters of the HDR*-tree.
B. Index structure
The structure of the HDR*-tree similar to that of the
HDR-tree, except that we use random projection instead of
PCA to transform user proﬁles in U into different dimen-
sional spaces. Again, the dimensionality increases from the
root to the leaf level. We add ε into the representation of
the clusters of the non-leaf nodes at each level, so that
each cluster in a non-leaf node is represented by a tuple
(center, radius, number, maxdknn, l, εl, ptr). Similar to the
HDR-tree, the leaf node contains the full user representation
with no dimensionality reduction.
To determine the dimensionality of each level, we ﬁx η
of the random projection procedure, and estimate the smallest
distortion value εmin that can be achieved. We choose a value
εmax as the distortion value of the root level of the tree. The
distortion value of every level of the tree is between these two
extremes. To be more speciﬁc, the distortion value at each level
l is estimated as:
εl = εmax −l −1
L −1 ∗(εmax −εmin)
Then the number of dimensions at each level is chosen to be
the smallest value that can satisfy the parameters η and εl.
In our setting, we choose εmin = 0.25 and εmax = 1.00.
Achlioptas et al. [7] give the limit condition of the parameters
in the worst cases. But it has been shown that random
projection has much better performance in practice [28].
C. Search algorithm
We have the following result on the HDR*-tree.
Theorem 4: If the distance between an item i′ and a cluster
Cl
j of the non-leaf node node in the HDR*-tree in the dl
dimensional space satisﬁes the following condition,
distrp(i′, Cl
j) > (1 + εl)maxdknn,
where maxdknn is the maxdknn value of Cl
j, then we can
assert that (1) if i′ is a new item, then no user in the cluster
will have i′ as one of its k nearest neighbors after i′ is inserted
with a probability of at least η; or (2) if i′ is an expired item,
then no user in the cluster has had i′ as one of his/her k nearest
neighbors with a probability of at least η.
Proof: According to Theorem 3, we have distrp(i′, Cl
j) <
(1 + εl)dist(i′, Cj), where Cj is the cluster in the original
space, with probability of at least η. So if the condition
distrp(i′, Cl
j) > (1+εl)maxdknn holds, then with probability
of at least η, we have dist(i′, Cj) > maxdknn. For any
user uj in the cluster, we have dist(i′, uj) ≥dist(i′, Cj) >
maxdknn > dknnj with probability of at least η, which
means that i′ will not be one of uj’s k nearest neighbors if i′
is a new item, or i′ has not been in uj’s kNN list if i′ is an
expired item.
The search algorithm on HDR*-tree prunes clusters based
on Theorem 4. The whole procedure is similar to the algorithm
for HDR-tree except that we search the sub-tree of the clusters
in the node only when dist(i′, Cl
j) ≤(1 + εl)maxdknn. We
keep the random matrix used in random projection, and utilize
it in the update process so that all points are projected into the
same sub-spaces.
D. Accuracy analysis
Random projection is performed at each non-leaf level
of the HDR*-tree to reduce dimensionality. According to
Theorem 3, there may exist users that fall out of the distortion
interval with a probability of less than 1 −η. Therefore, when
we prune clusters according to Theorem 4, a cluster that
contain affected users may be pruned by mistake, which causes
the incompleteness of the search result (false negatives).
We use recall to measure the accuracy of the search for
affected users using HDR*-tree.
646


Deﬁnition 3: Let the complete set of affected users by the
updated item i′ be R′, and the set of affected users obtained
by searching HDR*-tree be R∗. Recall is deﬁned as
Recall = | R∗ R′ |
| R′ |
Theorem 5: The lower bound of the recall when using
HDR*-tree to search for inﬂuenced users is
(1 −c(1 −η))L−1
where η is the probability in random projection, L is the height
of the tree, and c is a constant (c << 1).
Proof: According to Theorem 3, a point falls outside of
the distortion region of another point with a probability less
than 1 −η. So a user uj in R′ is not contained in R∗in
each level with probability less than c(1 −η), where c is a
constant less than 1 because the radius of the boundary sphere
of uj is no larger than maxdknn. A user point in R′ is not
contained in R∗in the whole tree with the probability less than
1 −(1 −c(1 −η))L−1. The number of points in | R∗ R′ | is
more than (1 −c(1 −η))L−1R′. So the recall is greater than
(1 −c(1 −η))L−1.
The cost analysis for the HDR*-tree is similar to that for the
HDR-tree. Random projection performs better than the latter
in two aspects. First, the computation of random projection
costs less than linear dimensionality reduction (PCA). The time
complexity of random projection is only O(ndr) where n is
the number of points, d is the original dimensionality, and
r is the reduced dimensionality. Second, random projection
performs better in clustering in lower dimensionality which
can be seen in experiments of [28][29]. This means more
unnecessary points may be pruned and thus HDR*-tree has
less computation cost.
VII.
EXPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments to validate the efﬁciency of using
our structures of incremental kNN joins for real-time recom-
mendation. We compare our strategies based on HDR-tree and
HDR*-tree with two baseline methods found in the literature
that could be used for searching affected users:
1)
NaiveRKNN: It is a naive method to search for af-
fected users without using any indexes by computing
the distances between the updated item and all the
user proﬁles in U. For each user, it decides whether
its kNN list should be updated.
2)
KNNJoin+: It is an existing algorithm for high-
dimensional kNN join that allows for incremental
update. It uses Sphere-tree [6] to ﬁnd the RkNN re-
sults of the updated items. It is a disk-based solution,
but is adapted to the main-memory setting in our
experiments.
Our experiments are conducted on both real world and
synthetic datasets. The real world dataset comes from the 128-
dimensional wavelet texture data from NUS-WIDE Image Data
Set [30], which contains 269,648 records from Flickr. We also
generate synthetic datasets with different dimensionalities and
different number of features for more controlled studies using
methods similar to those used in the work of Chakrabarti et al.
TABLE II.
DEFAULT VALUES
parameter
default value
window size
200,000
size of user set
50,000
k
10
dimension
128
η
0.95
[27]. To mimic the real application where the items appear in
streams, we create “streaming” versions of these datasets with
the window size set at 200,000. We randomly choose 50,000
records from the dataset as the user set. In the case of image
dataset, this can be understood as representing the users by the
images they liked in the past. Some of the default values used
in the experiments are shown in Table II. The efﬁciency is
measured by the average elapsed time and number of distance
computations on 100 updates. All experiments 1 are conducted
using Java language on a Dell machine with an Intel Core i5-
2400 CPU, 8G RAM, running Windows7 x64 OS.
A. Effect of Parameters
1) Varying the fanout: We study the effect of the fanout of
our index structures on the performance. Let the fanout range
from 3 to 40, and the elapsed time as well as the number
of distance computations in Fig. 5. The number of distance
computations increases when the fanout gets larger, because a
larger fanout leads to a smaller height of the tree and a large
size of the nodes, which negatively affects the pruning ability.
However, from Fig. 5(a) we can see that the elapsed time ﬁrst
decreases before the fanout reaches 5 and then increases after
that. The reason comes from the computation with the nodes
which decreases with increased fanout. When the fanout is
greater than 5, the increase in the computation time with the
user proﬁles in the leaf nodes becomes dominant so that the
curves go upward after that. In summary, for a given dataset,
there is an optimal choice of the fanout that gives the the least
elapsed time of the proposed index structures. In the rest of
the experiments, we choose 5 as the default fanout value. The
parameters of the other structures are also set to their optimal
values.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Elapsed time (s) 
Fanout
HDR-tree
HDR*-tree
(a) Elapsed time
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Distance computation 
(x1,000,000)
Fanout
HDR-tree
HDR*-tree
(b) Distance computation
Fig. 5.
Performance w.r.t fanout
2) Varying η for HDR*-tree: η is the dominant parameter
in constructing the HDR*-tree. We vary η from 0.55 to 0.95,
and the result on the elapsed time is shown in Fig. 6(a). The
cost of searching HDR*-tree to ﬁnd affected users grows as η
increases because a larger η causes the dimensionality of each
level and hence the search cost to be higher. On the ﬂip side,
1https://github.com/chongzi1990/continuouskNNjoin.git
647


we can see from Fig. 6(b) that a larger η makes the kNN join
results more accurate, as shown in Theorem 4. In the rest of
the experiments, we choose η = 0.95 unless otherwise noted
in order to ensure a high level of accuracy of the result. It is
worth noting that that the performance of HDR*-tree still is
better than HDR-tree when η is large (Fig. 7).
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.55
0.65
0.75
0.85
0.95
Elapsed time(s)

Fanout=5
Fanout=10
Fanout=20
(a) Elapsed time
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
0.55
0.65
0.75
0.85
0.95
Recall

(b) Accuracy
Fig. 6.
Performance w.r.t η for HDR*-tree
B. Comparison with existing methods
1) Varying the number of updated items: We ﬁrst compare
our methods with the two baseline methods in terms of the total
elapsed time when we vary the number of updated items from
100 to 600, and the result is shown in Fig. 7. The cost of all
indexes increases when the number of updates becomes larger,
as each update requires a search for affected users. The cost
is roughly linear with respect to the number of updated items
since each update requires an independent search. Apparently
both of our methods based on the HDR-tree and HDR*-tree
run signiﬁcantly faster than the baseline methods.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
100
200
300
400
500
600
Elapsed time (s)
 Number of updated items 
NaiveRKNN
HDR-tree
HDR*-tree
KNNJoin+
Fig. 7.
Performance w.r.t the number of updated items
2) Varying the size of user set: We test the efﬁciency
on different sizes of the user set. We can see from Fig. 8
that the HDR-tree-based method costs less than 1/2 time
of the NaiveRKNN methods and HDR*-tree costs less than
1/3 time. Our methods also perform better than Sphere-tree
in the kNNJoin+ algorithm for the following reasons. First,
our indexes have a better pruning power and thus incur less
distance computations (which can be seen in Fig. 8(b)) due to
the use of the clustering technique, as discussed in Section IV.
Second, the dimensionality reduction technique helps to reduce
the cost of computation compared to the kNNJoin+ algorithm
where distance computation is done in the original higher
dimensional space. We can also see that the HDR*-tree index
performs better than HDR-tree. The reason is that HDR*-tree
can prune more points because random projection can better
preserve the distance in lower dimensional space. The PCA
technique reduces a large number of dimensions but does
not give consideration to keeping the distance relationships
between points, and therefore more nodes are likely to be
visited in the HDR-tree than in the HDR*-tree. Admittedly,
the increase in performance comes at the price of accuracy.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
Elapsed time (s) 
Size of user set (x10,000)
NaiveRKNN
HDR-tree
HDR*-tree
KNNJoin+
(a) Elapsed time
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
Distance computation
(x1,000,000)
Size of user set (x10,000) 
NaiveRKNN
HDR-tree
HDR*-tree
KNNJoin+
(b) Distance computation
Fig. 8.
Performance w.r.t the size of the user set
3) Varying |W| and k: Figure 9(a) shows that with the
increase of the size of sliding window |W|, the elapsed time of
all the methods increases. The reason is that the recalculation
cost become larger when we an item expires. Also, from
the cost analysis we can see that the cost of searching for
affected users decreases as |W| rises because the average
number of affected users decreases. Clearly, the increase of
recalculation cost is dominant, which makes the curves go
upward. In Fig. 9(b), we can see that the elapsed time of all the
methods increases when the number of items recommended to
each user k increases. The reason is that a larger k means a
larger maxdknn value and more users affected by an update
item. We can see that recommending the 25NN items to each
user costs 30% more elapsed time for both of our methods
compared to recommending the 1NN item.










	


Elapsed time (s) 
|W| (x10,000)
NaiveRKNN
HDR-tree
HDR*-tree
KNNJoin+
(a) |W|













Elapsed time (s) 
k
NaiveRKNN
HDR-tree
HDR*-tree
KNNJoin+
(b) k
Fig. 9.
Performance w.r.t |W| and k






	


	


Elapsed time (s) 
Number of features 
NaiveRKNN
HDR-tree
HDR*-tree
KNNJoin+
(a) Elapsed time
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
48
64
80
96
112
128
Distance computation 
(x1,000,000)
Number of features 
NaiveRKNN
HDR-tree
HDR*-tree
KNNJoin+
(b) Distance computation
Fig. 10.
Performance w.r.t the number of features
4) Varying the number of features: We then conduct experi-
ments on the generated datasets with different dimensionalities,
using items with different numbers of features. Figure 10(a)
648


shows that the elapsed time increases as the number of features
grows because higher dimensionality increases the time of
distance computation. We can see that the cost of our structures
increases at a slower rate as the the number of features
increases, which means that our indexes are more robust
than the rest of methods. Figure 10(b) shows the numbers
of distance computations. NaiveRKNN computes distances
with all the users in all the datasets so that its number of
distance computations stays ﬁxed. The number of distance
computations of the tree structures increases when the the
number of features gets larger. The reason is that there is more
overlapping between nodes in higher dimensional space, which
causes the drop of pruning ability of the tree structures. Still,
both HDR-tree and HDR*-tree perform better than existing
methods for all the item sets with different numbers of features.
VIII.
CONCLUSIONS
We have addressed the problem of continuous kNN join
processing for real-time content-based recommendation. As
items in social applications are often represented by feature
vectors of hundreds of dimensions, the main issue is to
efﬁciently maintain the high-dimensional kNN join results as
data evolve. The basic idea of our approach is to ﬁrst identify
the users whose kNN results can be inﬂuenced by the update,
followed by recomputing the kNN results for this (usually
small) subset of users. We propose a new main-memory index
structure called HDR-tree on the user set to efﬁciently locate
the affected users by the updated items. Our index structure
combines clustering and PCA technique, and is efﬁcient for
high-dimensional search. Furthermore, we propose another
index HDR*-tree for the approximate search of affected users
using random projection as the tool for dimensionality reduc-
tion. It runs faster than HDR-tree at the expense of slight
inaccuracy (with a reasonable lower bound). The experiments
on both the real and synthetic datasets have demonstrated
the superiority of our proposals to existing methods for real-
time recommendation. Our plan for next stage is to make a
distributed implementation of the structure to further reduce
elapsed time.
IX.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This
work
was
supported
in
part
by
the
National
Natural Science Foundation of China Grant (61272092),
the Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation Grant
(ZR2012FZ004), the Science and Technology Development
Program of Shandong Province (2014GGE27178), the 973
Program (2015CB352500), the Independent Innovation Foun-
dation of Shandong University (2012ZD012), the Taishan
Scholars Program, and NSERC Discovery Grants.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Yu, B. Cui, S. Wang, and J. Su, “Efﬁcient index-based knn join
processing for high-dimensional data,” Information and Software Tech-
nology, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 332–344, 2007.
[2]
C. B¨ohm and F. Krebs, “The k-nearest neighbour join: Turbo charging
the kdd process,” KAIS, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 728–749, 2004.
[3]
W. H. Tok and S. Bressan, “Progressive and approximate join algorithms
on data streams,” in Advanced Query Processing, 2013, pp. 157–185.
[4]
C. Bohm, B. Ooi, C. Plant, and Y. Yan, “Efﬁciently processing contin-
uous k-nn queries on data streams,” in ICDE, 2007, pp. 156–165.
[5]
R. Weber, H. Schek, and S. Blott, “A quantitative analysis and perfor-
mance study for similarity-search methods in high-dimensional spaces,”
in VLDB, 1998, pp. 194–205.
[6]
C. Yu, R. Zhang, Y. Huang, and H. Xiong, “High-dimensional knn joins
with incremental updates,” Geoinformatica, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 55–82,
2010.
[7]
D. Achlioptas, “Database-friendly random projections,” in SIGMOD,
2001, pp. 274–281.
[8]
M. J. Pazzani and D. Billsus, “Content-based recommendation systems,”
in The adaptive web, 2007, pp. 325–341.
[9]
J. S. Breese, D. Heckerman, and C. Kadie, “Empirical analysis of
predictive algorithms for collaborative ﬁltering,” in UAI, 1998, pp. 43–
52.
[10]
A. S. Das, M. Datar, A. Garg, and S. Rajaram, “Google news person-
alization: scalable online collaborative ﬁltering,” in WWW, 2007, pp.
271–280.
[11]
D. Agarwal, B.-C. Chen, and P. Elango, “Fast online learning through
ofﬂine initialization for time-sensitive recommendation,” in KDD, 2010,
pp. 703–712.
[12]
S. Rendle and L. Schmidt-Thieme, “Online-updating regularized kernel
matrix factorization models for large-scale recommender systems,” in
RecSys, 2008, pp. 251–258.
[13]
E. Diaz-Aviles, L. Drumond, L. Schmidt-Thieme, and W. Nejdl, “Real-
time top-n recommendation in social streams,” in RecSys, 2012, pp.
59–66.
[14]
S. Abbar, S. Amer-Yahia, P. Indyk, and S. Mahabadi, “Real-time
recommendation of diverse related articles,” in WWW, 2013, pp. 1–12.
[15]
H. Jagadish, B. Ooi, K. Tan, C. Yu, and R. Zhang, “idistance: An
adaptive b+-tree based indexing method for nearest neighbor search,”
TODS, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 364–397, 2005.
[16]
B. Cui, B. Ooi, J. Su, and K. Tan, “Contorting high dimensional data
for efﬁcient main memory knn processing,” in SIGMOD, vol. 9, no. 12,
2003, pp. 479–490.
[17]
A. Gionis, P. Indyk, R. Motwani et al., “Similarity search in high
dimensions via hashing,” in VLDB, vol. 99, 1999, pp. 518–529.
[18]
C. Xia, H. Lu, B. C. Ooi, and J. Hu, “Gorder: an efﬁcient method for
knn join processing,” in VLDB, vol. 30, 2004, pp. 756–767.
[19]
N. Koudas, B. Ooi, K. Tan, and R. Zhang, “Approximate nn queries on
streams with guaranteed error/performance bounds,” in VLDB, vol. 30,
2004, pp. 804–815.
[20]
F. Korn and S. Muthukrishnan, “Inﬂuence sets based on reverse nearest
neighbor queries,” in SIGMOD, vol. 29, no. 2, 2000, pp. 201–212.
[21]
C. Yang and K. Lin, “An index structure for efﬁcient reverse nearest
neighbor queries,” in ICDE, 2001, pp. 485–492.
[22]
I. Stanoi, D. Agrawal, and A. Abbadi, “Reverse nearest neighbor queries
for dynamic databases,” in SIGMOD, 2000, pp. 44–53.
[23]
Y. Tao, D. Papadias, X. Lian, and X. Xiao, “Multidimensional reverse
knn search,” VLDB, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 293–316, 2007.
[24]
A. Singh, H. Ferhatosmanoglu, and A. S¸. Tosun, “High dimensional
reverse nearest neighbor queries,” in CIKM, 2003, pp. 91–98.
[25]
M. Zhang and R. Alhajj, “Effectiveness of naq-tree in handling reverse
nearest-neighbor queries in high-dimensional metric space,” KAIS,
vol. 31, pp. 307–343, 2012.
[26]
I. Stanoi, M. Riedewald et al., “Discovery of inﬂuence sets in frequently
updated databases,” in VLDB, 2001, pp. 99–108.
[27]
K. Chakrabarti and S. Mehrotra, “Local dimensionality reduction: A
new approach to indexing high dimensional spaces,” in VLDB, 2000,
pp. 89–100.
[28]
E. Bingham and H. Mannila, “Random projection in dimensionality
reduction: applications to image and text data,” in KDD, 2001, pp.
245–250.
[29]
S. Dasgupta, “Experiments with random projection,” in UAI, 2000, pp.
143–151.
[30]
T.-S. Chua, J. Tang, R. Hong, H. Li, Z. Luo, and Y.-T. Zheng, “Nus-
wide: A real-world web image database from national university of
singapore,” in ACM International Conference on Image and Video
Retrieval, 2009.
649
